

Mosca2012 - Central Carbon Metabolism Regulated by AKT

The role of the PI3K/Akt/PKB signalling pathway in oncogenesis has been
extensively investigated and altered expression or mutations of many
components of this pathway have been implicated in human cancers. Indeed,
expression of constitutively active forms of Akt/PKB can prevent cell death
upon growth factor withdrawal. PI3K/Akt/mTOR-mediated survival relies on a
profound metabolic adaptation, including aerobic glycolysis. Here, the link
between the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, glycolysis, lactic acid production and
nucleotide biosynthesis has been modelled, considering two states - high and
low PI3K/Akt/mTOR activity. The high PI3K/Akt/mTOR activity represents cancer
cell line where PI3K/Akt/mTOR promotes a high rate of glucose metabolism
(condition H) and the low PI3K/Akt/mTOR activity is characterised by a lower
glycolytic rate due to a reduced PI3K/Akt/mTOR signal (condition L). This
model corresponds to the high PI3K/Akt/mTOR signal (condition H).

This model is described in the article:

[Computational Modelling of the Metabolic States Regulated by the Kinase
Akt.](http://identifiers.org/doi/doi:10.3389/fphys.2012.00418)

Mosca E, Alfieri R, Maj C, Bevilacqua A, Canti G, Milanesi L.

Frontiers in Systems Biology. 2012 Oct 13

Abstract:

Signal transduction pathways and gene regulation determine a major
reorganization of metabolic activities in order to support cell proliferation.
Protein Kinase B (PKB), also known as Akt, participates in the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
pathway, a master regulator of aerobic glycolysis and cellular biosynthesis,
two activities shown by both normal and cancer proliferating cells. Not
surprisingly considering its relevance for cellular metabolism, Akt/PKB is
often found hyperactive in cancer cells. In the last decade, many efforts have
been made to improve the understanding of the control of glucose metabolism
and the identification of a therapeutic window between proliferating cancer
cells and proliferating normal cells. In this context, we have modelled the
link between the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway, glycolysis, lactic acid production and
nucleotide biosynthesis. We used a computational model in order to compare two
metabolic states generated by the specific variation of the metabolic fluxes
regulated by the activity of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. One of the two states
represented the metabolism of a growing cancer cell characterised by aerobic
glycolysis and cellular biosynthesis, while the other state represented the
same metabolic network with a reduced glycolytic rate and a higher
mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism, as reported in literature in relation to
the activity of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR. Some steps that link glycolysis and pentose
phosphate pathway revealed their importance for controlling the dynamics of
cancer glucose metabolism.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1210150000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1210150000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

